README.md, before:

# sheffield-air-pollution-analysis
Repository for my data science course IJC437 module project.

# Predicting Air Pollution Levels in Sheffield using Weather Data

### Introduction
Air pollution is a critical public health issue. It is associated with many health problems including asthma and lung cancer and it is estimated to account for around 29,000 to 43,000 deaths a year in the UK. Previous studies have shown that weather conditions have a big effect on air pollution levels.
This project analyses daily weather and air quality data in Sheffield (2022–2024) to understand how weather conditions influence Nitrogen Dioxide ($NO_2$) levels in Sheffield. I aim to explore and quantify the relationships between multiple weather variables and air pollution and build machine learning models to predict NO2 levels in Sheffield using weather data only.

### Research Questions
* **RQ1:** Which weather variables are most strongly correlated with air pollution levels in Sheffield?
* **RQ2.1:** To what extent can these weather variables predict air pollution levels in Sheffield?
* **RQ2.2:** Are multilinear regression models or random forest models better at predicting air pollution levels in Sheffield?

### Key Findings
* **Key Drivers:** Wind speed is by far the strongest predictor of NO2 levels in Sheffield followed by temperature and daylight duration. Higher wind speeds significantly reduce pollution.
* **Predictive power of weather data:** Weather data can predict NO2 levels in Sheffield fairly well. The multilinear regression model had an adjusted R squared value of 0.62 and relative prediction error of 29.1%. The random forest model had an OOB R squared value of 0.67 and relative prediction error of 27.7%.
* **Random Forest:** The random forest model performed better than the multilinear regression model. This is because many of the weather variables had non-linear relationships with NO2.

### The R Code
The analysis was performed using **R version 4.5.2**.
* **`data/`**: Contains the raw CSV files (weather and air pollution data).
* **`scripts/`**: Contains `full_script.R` (The full project script).

### Instructions for Downloading and Running the Project Code
1.  **Clone the repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone [https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/sheffield-air-pollution-analysis.git](https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/sheffield-air-pollution-analysis.git)
    ```
2.  **Open the project:**
    Open the `.Rproj` file in RStudio or any R-language supporting IDE.
3.  **Install dependencies:**
    Run the following line in the R console to install required packages if you do not have them installed already:
    ```r
    install.packages(c("tidyverse", "janitor", "openair", "ranger", "broom", "zoo", "writexl", "correlation", "corrplot", "FSA", "car", "lmtest", "sandwich","relaimpo", "openair","forecast", "ranger", "pdp"))
    ```
4.  **Run the Script:**
    Open `scripts/full_script.R` and click **"Run All"**.

Commit message:

Update README with working directory instructions
Added instructions for setting the working directory before running the script.

README.md, after:

# sheffield-air-pollution-analysis
Repository for my data science course IJC437 module project.

# Predicting Air Pollution Levels in Sheffield using Weather Data

### Introduction
Air pollution is a critical public health issue. It is associated with many health problems including asthma and lung cancer and it is estimated to account for around 29,000 to 43,000 deaths a year in the UK. Previous studies have shown that weather conditions have a big effect on air pollution levels.
This project analyses daily weather and air quality data in Sheffield (2022–2024) to understand how weather conditions influence Nitrogen Dioxide ($NO_2$) levels in Sheffield. I aim to explore and quantify the relationships between multiple weather variables and air pollution and build machine learning models to predict NO2 levels in Sheffield using weather data only.

### Research Questions
* **RQ1:** Which weather variables are most strongly correlated with air pollution levels in Sheffield?
* **RQ2.1:** To what extent can these weather variables predict air pollution levels in Sheffield?
* **RQ2.2:** Are multilinear regression models or random forest models better at predicting air pollution levels in Sheffield?

### Key Findings
* **Key Drivers:** Wind speed is by far the strongest predictor of NO2 levels in Sheffield followed by temperature and daylight duration. Higher wind speeds significantly reduce pollution.
* **Predictive power of weather data:** Weather data can predict NO2 levels in Sheffield fairly well. The multilinear regression model had an adjusted R squared value of 0.62 and relative prediction error of 29.1%. The random forest model had an OOB R squared value of 0.67 and relative prediction error of 27.7%.
* **Random Forest:** The random forest model performed better than the multilinear regression model. This is because many of the weather variables had non-linear relationships with NO2.

### The R Code
The analysis was performed using **R version 4.5.2**.
* **`data/`**: Contains the raw CSV files (weather and air pollution data).
* **`scripts/`**: Contains `full_script.R` (The full project script).

### Instructions for Downloading and Running the Project Code
1.  **Clone the repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone [https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/sheffield-air-pollution-analysis.git](https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/sheffield-air-pollution-analysis.git)
    ```
2.  **Open the project:**
    Open the `.Rproj` file in RStudio or any R-language supporting IDE.
3.  **Install dependencies:**
    Run the following line in the R console to install required packages if you do not have them installed already:
    ```r
    install.packages(c("tidyverse", "janitor", "openair", "ranger", "broom", "zoo", "writexl", "correlation", "corrplot", "FSA", "car", "lmtest", "sandwich","relaimpo", "openair","forecast", "ranger", "pdp"))
    ```
4.  **Run the Script:**
    Open `scripts/full_script.R`, set working directory to folder which contains downloaded raw weather and air pollution data e.g.
     ```r
    setwd("c:\\Users\\andmahoff user\\Documents\\Folder with raw air pollution and weather data")
     ```
    and click **"Run All"**.
